The 14-year-long journey of Goods and Service tax (GST) finally culminated on July 1, 2017 with the implementation of the biggest tax reform of India in 70 years of independence. While the government of India under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi hailed the moment of ‘Good and Simple Taxation System’ for the benefit of common people, small traders and industry as a whole; the opposition parties have slammed the establishment for forcing a half-baked GST regime over the taxpayers. The whole issue about the impact of GST on the auto industry hovers around the compliance of the new taxation system by the sector as a whole. The outlined benefits of GST on auto industry are primarily simplifying logistics and constraining the operational and manufacturing costs, the compliance is something industry is vary about. In order to reap the benefits of GST you need to take a close look to ensure the compliance of GST by both the parties you are directly linked to. Whether you are a business owner or a buyer of a car, scooter or moped, you need to be equipped to take on the GST ferry. You can use the support of ASP and GST suvidha providers authorised by the government to understand the details of compliance and related concerns. What started as a Single Nation Single Taxation drive has largely unified 17 different taxes including various excise duties, octroi, service tax, VAT, and many more. However a nation of more than a billion people has ideologue ready to delineate GST as another 17th tax. The myth is widespread like a cacophony before the elephant starts to walk. To brace with the impact of GST Indian Automobile Industry offered pre GST discounts on cars, scooters and bikes. The discounts poured in throughout the June as the Auto majors like Maruti Suzuki, Toyota, Hyundai, Honda and mostly all players announced big rate cuts in a race to trim their inventory ahead of GST. Amidst all the turmoil and apprehensions, July’17 went loudly ahead than the previous sluggish months and ended with a bang for the entire industry with Maruti Suzuki, Honda Cars and Ford India grabbing the podium. While The Maruti Suzuki recorded a staggering domestic growth of 22.4% in July ’17 as against July’16 Honda Cars too came out with flying colors with an astounding rise of 21.74%, as compared to July 2016. The initial GST ambiguities seem to be settling down and the festivity ahead will only add ice on the cake. To understand the impact of GST on the industry as a whole, you need to understand its effect on various business operations including production, procurement, pricing and sales strategy.
